← Research index
ORIGINAL RESEARCH5 September 2026
How Numerical Contracts Break: Five Cases in Swift Numerics and nntrainer
Five bounded audit cases show how documented equivalence, exact identities, input preservation and parameter propagation expose failures that fixed expected values can miss.
Xamit KadirbekovAuthors · GERO Research
Numerical contractsSoftware testingOpen source
STATUS · AUTHOR'S ANALYSISArguments and proposals are distinguished from the linked laboratories' reported results.
A numerical library can pass its tests and still violate a documented equivalence, return a complex value in the wrong quadrant, mutate its own inputs, or bypass a shared gradient-scaling mechanism.
In an independent audit of Swift Numerics and nntrainer, I looked beyond isolated expected numbers. I tested exact mathematical relations, repeated-call consistency, input preservation, parameter propagation, and agreement between public documentation and runtime behavior.
The result is a set of five compact cases. The first is an accuracy observation rather than a confirmed defect. The other four are open upstream reports with reproducible counterexamples.
This is not a security assessment or a general judgment on either project. It is a practical demonstration of contract-based numerical testing.
Audit method
The workflow varied by case, but followed the same structure:
1. Identify a documented property, mathematical identity, or pipeline contract.
2. Build a minimal reproducer.
3. Compare against an independent oracle or an exact internal relation.
4. Locate the responsible source branch.
5. Test a bounded repair with focused regression checks.
6. Report the result upstream with explicit scope and limitations.
Case 1 — One ULP in Double.root
The initial observation was:
Double.root(3125, 5)
The mathematical fifth root of 3125 is exactly 5, while the runtime result is one unit in the last place above it:
5.000000000000001
This result alone does not establish a library defect. Xiaodi Wu correctly noted that the behavior is not unique to `root` or to Swift Numerics: it can arise from composing approximate floating-point operations.
The useful conclusion is narrower. The case exposes a boundary of observed accuracy and shows why surprising rounding must be separated from violations of exact contracts.
Discussion:
github.com
Case 2 — Complex.reciprocal and a documented equivalence
The public documentation says that, when `reciprocal` returns a value rather than `nil`, direct division is always equivalent to multiplication by that value.
A counterexample is:
let a = Complex<Double>(1e300, 0)
let b = Complex<Double>(1e300, 1e200)
print(a / b)
print(a * b.reciprocal!)
The two paths return:
a / b           = (0.9999999999999999, -1e-100)
a * reciprocal  = (0.9999999999999999,  0.0)
The imaginary component of the reciprocal underflows to zero. Direct division uses scaling and preserves its contribution.
This is not a demand that arbitrary algebraically equivalent floating-point expressions be bitwise identical. It is a counterexample to a specific statement in the public API documentation.
Report:
github.com
Case 3 — The wrong quadrant in Complex.cosh and Complex.sinh
The more serious Swift Numerics case appears in a branch designed to avoid overflow:
let z = Complex<Double>(-40, 0.5)
print(Complex.cosh(z))
print(Complex.sinh(z))
Observed:
cosh(z) =  1.032850027510405e17 + 5.642485416641618e16 i
sinh(z) = -1.032850027510405e17 - 5.642485416641618e16 i
The imaginary signs should be the opposite. Exact identities determine the expected quadrants:
cosh(-x + iy) = conjugate(cosh(x + iy))
sinh(-x + iy) = -conjugate(sinh(x + iy))
These checks do not depend on another library or on a tolerance near the last bit. An 80-decimal-digit `mpmath` evaluation independently confirms the expected signs.
The cause is in the large-`abs(x)` fast paths. In `cosh`, the sign of the negative real input is not applied to the imaginary component. In `sinh`, it is applied to both components even though it should affect only the real one. The error then propagates to `Complex.cos` and `Complex.sin`.
This is a wrong-quadrant result, not a last-bit discrepancy. Existing near-overflow tests contain the same incorrect sign expectations.
Report:
github.com
Case 4 — KLD backward mutates its label
In nntrainer's Kullback–Leibler divergence layer, the derivative path negates the label in place:
label.multiply_i(-1.0f);
label.divide(predicted, deriv);
For P = 0.25 and Q = 0.5, the expected derivative is -0.5. Two consecutive backward calls produce:
before backward:  label = +0.25
first backward:   gradient = -0.5, label = -0.25
second backward:  gradient = +0.5, label = +0.25
The gradient alternates because the computation mutates its input state.
A bounded local repair writes the negative value directly into the output tensor while leaving `label` unchanged. The focused regression check passes after that change.
Report:
github.com
Case 5 — Four loss layers bypass loss_scale
nntrainer has a shared dynamic loss-scaling mechanism, but four implemented loss layers do not call the existing helper:
sigmoid cross-entropy;
softmax cross-entropy;
KLD;
constant-derivative loss.
With `loss_scale = 8`, a derivative of -0.5 should become -4.0. In the affected layers it remains -0.5.
Adding the existing call:
LossLayer::applyLossScale(context, ret_derivative);
makes all four focused counterexamples and 71 focused regression tests pass. The KLD layer uses the output name `deriv`, but the helper call is the same.
I do not claim a fully green project build: 104 unrelated golden tests could not run correctly because their runtime data was absent from the tested checkout.
Report:
github.com
What the cases have in common
There is no demonstrated single root cause across these cases. What unifies them is the detection method: test properties and contracts in addition to fixed expected numbers.
The most productive checks were:
exact mathematical relations between outputs;
preservation of input data;
repeatability under identical calls;
propagation of control parameters through the full pipeline;
agreement between public documentation and runtime behavior.
One unexpected last digit is not automatically a defect. A wrong component sign, mutation of an input tensor, omission of `loss_scale`, or a direct counterexample to a documented equivalence is a different class of evidence.
The practical conclusion is simple: numerical systems should be tested not only with examples, but also with properties that must hold for entire families of inputs. Those checks can expose failures that ordinary example-based tests miss.
As of 5 September 2026, the four reports presented here as defects — #346, #347, #4328, and #4329 — remain open and have no maintainer comments.
Executable Swift audit materials:
github.com
Root-accuracy audit materials:
github.com
Independent reproduction and analysis by Xamit Kadirbekov / GERO. No affiliation with Apple, Swift Numerics, Samsung, or the nntrainer maintainers is claimed.
