← Research index
ORIGINAL RESEARCH4 September 2026
A KL-Divergence Backward Pass That Changes Its Own Target
A one-scalar experiment shows how an in-place label negation makes repeated KL-divergence backward calls alternate their gradient sign.
Xamit KadirbekovAuthors · GERO Research
State mutationAutodiffKL divergence
STATUS · AUTHOR'S ANALYSISArguments and proposals are distinguished from the linked laboratories' reported results.
Some numerical defects produce an obviously wrong answer. A more dangerous class produces the right answer once and corrupts the state needed for the next computation.
I found and reproduced such a case in Samsung's open-source nntrainer project. The Kullback–Leibler divergence backward pass changes its stored label in place. For a fixed input, the first derivative has the correct sign; the second identical backward call has the opposite sign.
The mathematical invariant
For
D_KL(P || Q) = sum_i P_i log(P_i / Q_i),
the derivative with respect to the prediction Q is
dD_KL/dQ_i = -P_i / Q_i.
Two necessary properties follow immediately:
evaluating the derivative must not modify the target distribution P;
repeated backward evaluations on unchanged state must return the same derivative.
These are stronger tests than checking one numerical answer. The first call can be correct even while the implementation destroys the label that made it correct.
The smallest counterexample
I constructed the actual nntrainer RunLayerContext with one scalar:
target P = 0.25;
prediction Q = 0.5;
expected derivative = -0.5.
Then I invoked the real KLDLossLayer::calcDerivative twice without changing the context.
The observed state transition was:
before backward: label +0.25;
after the first backward: gradient -0.5, label -0.25;
after the second backward: gradient +0.5, label +0.25.
The gradient sign alternates between calls. This is deterministic state mutation, not a floating-point tolerance dispute.
The implementation cause
The current backward implementation obtains a reference to the stored label and calls an in-place operation equivalent to:
label = -label
It then divides that modified label by the prediction. The first derivative is numerically correct, but only because the target distribution itself was negated.
The defect is compact enough to escape an ordinary one-shot test. A test that checks only the first derivative can pass. A test that also checks state preservation and repeatability exposes it immediately.
A correction tested on the real library
I replaced the in-place negation with an out-of-place operation that writes directly into the derivative tensor, then divides that derivative by Q. The label remains unchanged.
Against the original implementation, the focused GoogleTest failed because the second gradient was +0.5 instead of -0.5 and the label after the first call was -0.25 instead of +0.25.
After rebuilding the actual nntrainer dynamic library with the correction, the same test passed: both backward calls returned -0.5 and the label remained +0.25.
This validates the narrow correction. It does not claim that every reduction, loss-scaling or upstream-gradient convention in the KLD layer has been audited.
Why this matters for AI assurance
Loss functions sit at the point where mathematics becomes an update to model parameters. State corruption here can depend on execution history: how many times backward was invoked, whether a retry occurred, or whether a debugging tool re-evaluated a step.
The larger lesson is methodological. A mathematical contract should include not only a formula for the output, but also invariants about state:
1. purity — which tensors are allowed to change;
2. repeatability — whether identical calls return identical results;
3. conservation — whether normalization or probability mass is preserved;
4. composition — whether the result remains correct inside a larger chain rule.
This is the kind of evidence GERO is being designed to organize: explicit invariants, minimal counterexamples, real-runtime execution, bounded claims and replayable artifacts.
Reproduction and disclosure
Tested against nntrainer commit a7ea056e79ab8e14447ea305c1b634e233343258 on macOS ARM64.
Local reproducibility record:
gero.uz
Upstream report:
github.com
This finding was independently identified and reproduced by Xamit Kadirbekov. No affiliation with Samsung or the nntrainer maintainers is claimed.
